MAJOR SINS
Imam Shamsu ed-Deen Dhahabi
Distributed by: http://www.islambasics.com
CONTENTS
• Definition
1. Ascribing Associates To Allah, The Most High (Shirk)
2. Killing A Human Being
3. Sorcery
4. Not Performing the Prayer
5. Not Paying Zakat
6. Breaking One's Fast During Ramadan Without an Excuse
7. Not Performing the Hajj When Able to
8. Showing Disrespect to One's Parents
9. Severing the Ties of One's Relatives
10. Adultery
11. Sodomy
12. Accepting Usurious Gain
13. Wrong Consuming an Orphan's Property
14. Lying About the Prophet
15. Fleeing From the Battlefield
16. The Leader Who Misleads His Followers, the Tyrant and the Oppressor
17. Arrogance, Pride, Conceit, Vanity and Haughtiness
18. Bearing False Witness
19. Drinking Alcohol
20. Gambling (Qimar)
21. Accusing a Woman of Adultery
22. Misappropriating Spoils of War, Muslim Funds or Zakat
23. Theft
24. Highwaymen Who Menace the Road
25. The Engulfing Oath
26. Taking People's Property Through Falsehood
27. Collecting Taxes
28. The Consumption of Haram
29. Suicide
30. Telling Lies
31. The Dishonest Judge
32. Bribery
33. Women Imitating Men and Vice Versa
34. The Pimp and the One Who Permits His Wife To Fornicate
35. Marrying Solely to Return to the Previous Husband
36. Not Freeing Oneself of All Traces of Urine
37. Showing off in Good Work
38. Learning Sacred Knowledge for the Sake of this World or Concealing It
39. Breach of Faith
40. Reminding Recipients of One's Charity to Them
41. Disbelieving in Destiny
42. Listening to the People's Private Conversations
43. The Talebearer Who Stirs Up Enmity Between People
44. Cursing Others
45. Breaking One's Promise or Pledge
46. Believing Fortunetellers and Astrologers
47. A Wife's Rebellion Against Her Husband
48. Picture-making
49. Loudly Lamenting For the Dead or When Afflicted With an Adversity
50. Excess Against Others
51. Overburdening and Arrogance Against Others
52. Hurting One's Neighbor
53. Hurting or Reviling Muslims
54. Harming the Servants of Allah
55. Dragging the Hem of One's Garment Out of Conceit
56. Men Wearing Silk or Gold
57. Fleeing of the Slave
58. Slaughtering in Other Than Allah's Name
59. Falsely Claiming Someone is One's Father
60. Arguing, Picking Apart Another's Words, and Quarreling
61. Withholding Excess Water From Others
62. Stinting When Weighing or Measuring Out Goods and Similar Merchandise
63. Feeling Secure From Allah's Devising
64. Despairing of the Mercy of Allah and Losing of Hope
65. Forgoing the Congregational Prayer to Pray Alone Without A Legal Excuse
66. Constantly Missing the Friday and Congregational Prayer Without A Valid Excuse
67. Bringing Loss to the Bequest
68. Deception and Evil Schemes
69. Spying on the Muslims and Revealing Their Weaknesses
70. Disparaging the Companions of the Prophet
Acknowledgment
In translating this book EI-Falah staff members attempted to study and analyze some books published
in the same field in order to be consistent. Although the book was written in the same style and wording
used by the early Muslim scholars, the translators, in turn, have nothing but to assimilate, paraphrase and
then translate in a simple English structure. Therefore, we are indebted to our translators:
Abdul-Hamid A. Eliwa Ali M. As-Sawi
Wa'il A. Shehab
Mahmud AI-Qastawi
Great appreciation is due to our editor, Jeewan Chanicka under whose guidance and supervision the
subject matter took form.
Our gratitude goes to friends, associates, and professors for their valuable advice and help and for
many useful things we have learnt from them.
In truth, the benefit yielded from this book as a spiritual sermon began before it was sent to the printer's
as it puts before our eyes the abode, which we are going to.
PREFACE
Praise be to Allah under Whose Might all worlds are subdued and all hearts acknowledge and
surrender to in fear. Thanks are due to Him for concealing my faults and sins. May Allah bless the
Messenger, Muhammed and give him peace upon whom Allah revealed the surah of Qaf.
To commence: I introduce this book (Major sins) written by Imam Dhahabi in another form. As I
verified the text, documented1 the hadiths and maxims, and elaborated on the difficult words. Thus, it is
better to keep on reading this book day and night alone and aloud. You have to bear in mind that what you
view in this world is either good or bad, clear or vague, a lust followed by sorrow or sins followed by
gloom. Therefore, you have to reject a perishable joy or lust, a binding condemnity, an inevitable sorrow,
and a grievous affliction. Judge yourself before being judged by Allah the Lord of the universe. Remember
that the one who will be prosperous, is the one who washes away the filth of his sins by repentance while
repentance is available, awaked and gets out from the place of sins to the fort of guidance before repentance
and apology are of no avail. May Allah safeguard us with His sleepless eyes and keep us away from faults
and sins for He is the All-Hearing, the Nearest.
Dr. Mustafa M. Dhahabi
1 I did not criticize or verify the narratives and maxims mentioned in the book which contradict clear sacred texts. It is sufficient to
refer only to the authentic texts and leave others aside.
Imam Dhahabi
The full name of Imam Dhahabi is Shamsu ed-Deen, Abu Abdullah Muhammed Ibn Ahmed Ibn
Uthman Ibn Qayma, who lived in Turkman and then moved to Damascus. He was born in 673 A.H. in
Damascus. He moved to Cairo and visited many countries. Before he died, he became blind. He was Hafiz,
scholar of Hadith, and historian.
He wrote many interesting books such as Tazkirat al-Huffaz, Islamic Countries, History of Islam,
The Biography of Well-known Nobles, The Biographic of Notes of the Hadith Transmitters, Classes of
Readers, Prophetic Medicine, Greatest Leadership, Moderate Balance in Evaluating the Transmitters,
Mustadrak on "Mustadrak AI-Hakim" Furthermore, he summarized many other books. He died in 748 A.H.
Major Sins
Definition:
Major sins are defined as what is forbidden by Allah and His Messenger in the Qur'an and the Sunnah
in addition to what is narrated on the authority of early Muslims. Allah, the Most high, promises whoever
avoids the major sins to expiate his minor sins. Allah, the Almighty says,
{If ye (but) eschew the most heinous of the things which ye are forbidden to do, we shall remit your evil
deeds, and admit you to a gate of great honour.} (An-Nisaa :31)
In this text, Allah, the Most High, also promises whoever avoids the major sins to admit him to
Paradise.
Allah, the Almighty says,
{Those who avoid the greater sins and indecencies, and when they are angry even they forgive;}
(Ash-Shura:37)
The Qur'an also states,
{Those who avoid great sins and indecent deeds, save lesser offences, verily thy Lord is ample in
forgiveness.} (An-Najm:32)
The Prophet (pbuh) said,
"The five prescribed Prayers, and from one Friday Prayer to another and from Ramadan to another entail
forgiveness for what is between them as long as you do not commit the major sins.”1
We are obliged to learn about what the major sins are, so that Muslims may avoid them. Scholars of
Sacred knowledge are of different opinions about the number of the major sins. It is argued that they are
only seven owing to the Prophet's (pbuh) saying,
"Avoid the seven heinous sins: Worshipping others with Allah, sorcery, taking a life which Allah has made
1 Reported by Muslim, TirmijJhi, Ibn Khuzaymah and Ahmed.
sacred except in the course of justice, devouring usury, appropriating the property of the orphan, fleeing
from the battlefield, and charging believing women, unmindful though innocent, with adultery.” 1
Ibn Abbas holds that they are likely counted as seventy not seven. That is a good point of view
because enumeration is not intended in the Hadith.
As a matter of fact, any sin entailing either a threat of punishment in the Hereafter explicitly
mentioned by the Qur'an or Hadith, a prescribed legal penalty (Hadd), or being accursed by Allah or His
Messenger (pbuh) is called a major sin. We have to bear in mind that some major sins are most heinous
than another. This is because the Prophet (pbuh) has enlisted Shirk (worshipping others with Allah) though
a polytheist will suffer eternal torture in Fire and will never be forgiven.
Allah, the Almighty, says,
{Allah forgiveth not (the sin of) joining other gods with Him, but He forgiveth whom He pleaseth other sins
than .} (An-Nisa:116)
1 Reported by Bukhari and Muslim.
1) Ascribing Associates To Allah, the Most High (Shirk)
The worst major sin is Shirk. It is of two kinds:
a) To hold that Allah has an equal, whereas He has created you, and to worship another with Him, whether
it be a stone, tree, sun, moon, prophet, sheikh, star, angel or other. This is the greatest shirk mentioned by
Allah, the Most High, the Almighty, says,
{Allah forgiveth not (the sin of) joining other gods with Him; but He forgiveth whom He pleaseth other sins
than this; one who joins other gods with Allah hath strayed far, far away (from the right).}
(An-Nisa:l16)
{False worship is indeed the highest wrong-doing.} (Luqman:13)
{Whoever joins other gods with Allah; Allah will forbid him the Garden, and the Fire will be his abode.}
(Al-Ma'idah:72)
The Qur'anic verses concerning this are very numerous. It is being absolutely certain that whoever ascribes
associates to Allah and dies in such a state is one of Hell's inhabitants, just as whoever believes in Allah
and dies as a believer is one of the inhabitants of Paradise, even if be should be punished first.
The Prophet (pbuh) said,
"Shall I tell you of the worst major sins? Worshipping others with Allah, showing disrespect to
parents, giving a false statement, and testifying to the truth of a falsehood. " And he kept repeating it until
we were telling ourselves (out of sympathy for him because of the strain of repeating it), "If only he would
be silent.”1
"Avoid the seven heinous sins.”2
and he mentioned ascribing associates to Allah.
"Kill whoever converted his religion (Islam).” 3
b) Ostentation
Allah, the Most High, says,
{Whoever expects to meet his Lord, let him work righteous, and, in the worship of his Lord, admit no one
as partner.} (AL-Kahf:llO)
i.e., does not show off in good works
1 Reponed by Bukhari, Muslim and Tirmidhi.
2 Reponed before.
3 Reponed by Bukhari, Ahmed, Ibn Hibban, An-Nasa'i and Abu Ya'la.
"Beware of the lesser shirk." They asked, "What is the lesser shirk?" He said, "Showing off in good works.
Allah, the Almighty will say when recompensing the mankind for their deeds: Go to those whom you
showed off to in the world to see how they could recompense you. .” 1
The Prophet (pbuh) said,
"If anybody associates something with Me, I am not affected. If anyone associates somebody with Me, in
any way, I reject him and his act of associating.”2
The Prophet (pbuh) said,
"A person who does some good work in order to boast will have his faults exposed by Allah Most High and
a person whose motive in doing some good deed is to show it, Allah the Most High will treat him as a
hypocrite.”3
The Prophet (pbuh) said,
"There may be a faster who does not gain from his fasting but hunger and thirst.”
A wise man said, "Just as the one who shows off in good works is the one who fills his purse with
pebbles and leaves for the market to buy food. If he opened it before the seller he will be stoned with it in
his face. He gains nothing but the people's inquiry about what fills his purse, nothing more. Thus, the one
who shows off in good works will have no value but the people's saying that he did good and he will not be
rewarded in the Hereafter."
Allah, the Almighty, says,
{And We shall turn to whatever deeds they did (in this life), and We shall make such deed as floating dust
scattered about.} (AI-Furqan:23)
The Messenger of Allah (pbuh) said,
"On the Day of Judgment some groups of people will be brought near Paradise. Having smelt its
fragrance, and seen palaces and blessings therein, they will hear a call saying "Take them away, it is not
for them." Accordingly, they return so sorrowful that no one could have such feeling. They will call upon
Allah, "0 Lord were we entered into the Hell-Fire before seeing what You have prepared for Your Friends,
it would have been better." Then Allah will say, " That is what I want. When you were alone you defied Me
with grievous sins, but when you meet people you showed off in good works, You only respected people not
Me, You only refrain (from things) for their sake. Hence, today, I will severely torment you in addition to
depriving you from My bountiful reward.” 4
It was related that a man asked the Messenger of Allah (pbuh)
"How can I be redeemed?" The Prophet said, "If you do not deceive Allah" The man asked, "How is Allah
deceived?" He replied, "When you do something which Allah and His Messenger commanded you to do but
1 Reported by Ahmad.
2 Reported by Muslim. It's a Qudsi Hadith.
3 Reported by A1-Bukhari.
4 Mentioned by A1-Siuti in "AI Laiali AI-Masnu'ah" who related that Ibn Hibban said that it is false and has no reference.
you intended other than pleasing Allah. Beware of ostentation, it is the lesser shirk (polytheism); On the
Day of Judgment, the ostentatious will be called at the presence of all creatures by four names: O
Ostentatious, O traitors, O corrupt, O loser; what you did is wasted and your reward is nullified. We will
not reward you, go and get your reward from whomever you acted to deceive?” 1
A wise man was asked, "Who is the sincere one?" He replied, "It is he who hides his good deeds as he
does with his bad deeds." Someone asked, "What is the good of sincerity?" He said, "When you dislike to
be praised by people."
Al-Fudail Ibn Eiad, may Allah be pleased with him said, "To refrain from an action for the sake of
people is ostentation. To do something for their sake is shirk (polytheism). But sincerity is to be aware of
them.
O Allah! Let us be away from them and forgive us.
1 Reported by AI-Zubaidi in lthaf
2) Killing A Human Being
Allah, the Almighty, says,
{If a man kills a believer intentionally, his recompense is Hell, to abide therein (for ever); and the wrath
and curse of Allah are upon him, and a dreadful chastisement is prepared for him.}
(An-Nisa:93)
{Those who invoke not, with Allah, any other god, nor slay such life as Allah has made sacred, except for
just cause, nor commit fornication,' and any that does this (not only) meets punishment.}
(Al-Furqan:68)
{On that account: We ordained for the children of Israel that if anyone slew a person -unless it be for
murder 'or for spreading mischief in the land -it would be as if he slew the whole people.}
(AI- Ma'ida:32)
{When the female (infant), buried alive, is questioned -for what crime she killed.}
(Al- Takwir: 8-9)
The Prophet (pbuh) said,
"Avoid the seven heinous sins."
And he mentioned taking one's life which Allah has made sacred except in the course of justice.
It was related that someone asked the Prophet (pbuh),
"What is the most heinous sin in the sight of Allah?" The Prophet replied, "To hold that Allah has an equal
whereas He has created you." .The man asked, "What else?" The Prophet said, "To kill your child lest he
feeds with you." The man asked, "What else?" He said, "To commit adultery with your neighbor's wife.” 1
Therefore, Allah, the Almighty, revealed,
{Those who invoke not, with Allah, any other god, nor slay such life as Allah has made sacred, except for
just cause, nor commit fornication,. and any that does this (not only) meets punishment.}
(Al-Furqan:68)
It was related that the Messenger of Allah said,
"When two Muslims meet with drawn sword, both the slayer and the slain are in the Hell." It was said, "0
Messenger of Allah, that is for the slayer. But why the slain?" He replied, "Because his intention was to kill
the other.”2
Abu Suliman Al-Khitabi commented, "Such punishment does not apply to a legal and justifiable combat.
They entail this abode if they fight one another out of enmity, fanaticism, to acquire some worldly benefit
or a position of leadership. Thus, out of this pole is the one who fights against an aggressive Muslim if he
follows the rules of fighting and the one who defends himself without intending to kill the opponent.
1 Reported by Bukhari, Muslim, Tirmidhi and An- Nasa'i.
2 Reported by Bukhari, Muslim, Abu Dawud, An-Nisa'i, Ibn Majah and Ibn Hibban.
Whoever fights against an aggressive Muslim or a highway robber, should not seek to kill them. Rather he
should try to deter him as much as he can. When they refrain we should refrain. The Prophet (pbuh) said,
"You should not turn an unbeliever when I am no more (among you) and start killing and shedding blood
among yourselves.” 1
The Prophet (pbuh) said,
"The first thing among human beings to be adjudicated on the Day of Judgment, will be the blood claim.” 2
"Taking a believer's life is more grievous in Allah's sight than the perishing of this world.” 3
"The major sins are worshipping others with Allah, showing disrespect to parents, killing a human being,
and the breaking one's oath.”4
It is termed engulfing because it overwhelms its swearer in the Fire.
"For all the murders committed in this world without any justification, prophet Adam's son, Qabil will get
a share of punishment, because it was he who inaugurated the method of killing by murdering his brother
Habil.”5
If this is the abode of he who kills a covenant man then what about killing a Muslim?
The Prophet (pbuh) said,
"Whoever killed anyone of the people of the covenant will never get the aroma of paradise which can be
smelt from forty years away.”6
"Whoever helps in killing a Muslim even by just a part of a word, he will meet Allah with the written phrase
on his forehead "Despondent of Allah's Mercy.”7
"Every sin might be forgiven by Allah except for a man dying an unbeliever or a man killing a believer
deliberately.” 8
1 Reported before.
2 Reported by Bukhari and Muslim.
3 Reported by Bukhari and Muslim
4 Reported by Bukhari and Muslim
5 Reported by Bukhari and Muslim
6 Reported by Bukhari.
7 Reported by Ibn Majah. It is a weak Hadith.
8 Reported by Abu Dawud.
3) Sorcery
Sorcery is a major sin because the sorcerer must necessarily disbelieve and the accursed Devil
has no other motive for teaching a person witchcraft than that he might thereby ascribe associates
to Allah.
Allah, the Almighty, says,
{Solomon did not disbelieve but Satan disbelieved, teaching men magic, and such things as came
down at Babylon to the angels Harut and Marut. But neither of these taught anyone (such things) without
saying, 'We are only for trial,' so do not blaspheme.' They learned from them the means to sow discord
between man and wife. But they could not harm anyone except by Allah's permission. And they learned
what harmed them, not what profited them. And they knew that the buyers of (magic) would have no share
in the happiness of the Hereafter.} (AI- Baqarah: 102)
Thus, you might find some people who are astray delving in learning sorcery and thinking that
it is just unlawful. Actually, they do not consider what they do as disbelief, but it is! They embark
on learning all kinds of sorcery: Pure sorcery, increasing or decreasing the love between a man
and a woman, making a man important and the like.
All of these practices are done by means of some unknown words, most of which lead to
unbelief.
The penalty for a sorcerer is to be killed. This is because he is an unbeliever. The Prophet
(pbuh) said,
"Avoid the seven heinous sins.”1
And he mentioned sorcery.
"The penalty for a sorcerer is the sword.”2
Bijalah Ibn Abah related, 'Umar (may Allah be pleased with him) came to us one year before his
death and said,
"Kill every sorcerer (male or female).”3
Wahb Ibn Munabbih said, "I read in a book: 'Allah the Almighty says, 'There is no god but Me. He is not of
Me who practices sorcery, or asks someone to practice with him. The one who foretells or the foretold, the
one who seeks an omen or for whom an omen is sought.” 4
`Ali Ibn Abi Talib (may Allah be pleased with him) said, A for tuneteller is a sorcerer, a sorcerer is a
disbeliever."
Abu Musa AI-Ashari, may Allah be pleased with him, related that the Prophet (pbuh) said,
1 Reported before.
2 Reported by Tirmidhi.
3 Reported by Abu Dawud.
4 Reported by AI- Haythami in "Majma' Az-Zawa'id to Al-Bazzar
"The drunkard, the one who severs the ties of kinship, and whoever believes in sorcery will not enter
Paradise.”1
Ibn Mas'ud (may Allah be pleased with him) related that the Prophet (pbuh) said,
"Incantations, amulets and spells are Shirk (polytheism).”2
These are treated as Shirk because the ignorant believes that these things can affect what has been
predetermined by Allah. However, AIKhattabi said, "Incantations or healing words are permitted if they
consist of the Qur'an or the Most Beautiful Names of Allah."
The Prophet (pbuh) used to recite (incantate) AI-Hasan and AlHusain by saying,
"I seek refuge for you in Allah's Perfect Words from every Devil, beast or envious .” 3
1 Reported by Ahmad.
2 Reported by Abu Dawud, Ibn Majah and Ahmad.
3 Reported by Bukhari.
4) Not Performing the Prayer
Allah, the Most High, says,
{But after them there followed a posterity who missed Prayers and followed after lusts soon, then, will they
face destruction, except those who repent and believe, and work righteousness.}
(Maryam: 59-60)
Commenting on the above verses (Ayat), Ibn 'Abbas said,
"Allah's statement, "Who missed Prayers does not
mean that they did not perform it at all but rather they did not perform it in its due time.”
Sa'id Ibn AI-Mussaiyyib, Imam of the Tabi'een (may Allah be pleased with him) said, "It is he who
postpones the Dhuhr (Early Afternoon Prayer) until the time of Asr Prayer (Late Afternoon Prayer) and so
are Maghrib (Sunset Prayer) until' /sha' (Evening Prayer), /sha until Fajr (Dawn Prayer) and Fajr until the
sun rises. If someone dies persisting in such habits and does not repent to Allah, Allah promises to make
him face Ghayy (destruction). But Ghayy may also be the name of a valley in the Hell whose bottom is so
deep and tastes so bitter.
Allah, the Most High, says,
{So woe to the worshipers who are neglectful of their Prayer.} (Ma'un: 4-5)
Sa'd Ibn Abi Waqqas related, "I asked the Prophet (pbuh) about the meaning of "the worshipers who
are neglectful of their Prayer.' He said, "It is the delaying of performing the Prayer in its definite time." The
word (Wayl) in the Ayah may refer to severe torture or it may be the name of a valley in the Hell. Wer